[['the torah speaks of four children : one is wise , one is wicked , one is simple and one does not know how to ask .', 'the wise one , what does he say ? what are the testimonies , the statutes and the laws which the l-rd , our g-d , has commanded you ? you , in turn , shall instruct him in the laws of passover , [ up to ] one is not to eat any dessert after the passover-lamb .', 'the wicked one , what does he say ? what is this service to you ?! he says to you , but not to him ! by thus excluding himself from the community he has denied that which is fundamental . you , therefore , blunt his teeth and say to him : it is because of this that the l-rd did for me when i left egypt ; for me - but not for him ! if he had been there , he would not have been redeemed !', 'the simpleton , what does he say ? what is this ? thus you shall say to him : with a strong hand the l-rd took us out of egypt , from the house of slaves .', 'as for the one who does not know how to ask , you must initiate him , as it is said : you shall tell your child on that day , it is because of this that the l-rd did for me when i left egypt .'], ['the torah speaks of four types of children : one is wise , one is wicked , one is simple , and one does not know how to ask .', 'the wise one asks : what is the meaning of the laws and traditions g-d has commanded ? you should teach him all the traditions of passover , even to the last detail .', 'the wicked one asks : what does this ritual mean to you ? by using the expression to you he excludes himself from his people and denies g-d . shake his arrogance and say to him : it is because of what the l-rd did for me when i came out of egypt ... for me and not for him -- for had he been in egypt , he would not have been freed .', 'the simple one asks : what is all this ? you should tell him : it was with a mighty hand that the l-rd took us out of egypt , out of the house of bondage .', 'as for the one who does not know how to ask , you should open the discussion for him , as it is written : and you shall explain to your child on that day , it is because of what the l-rd did for me when i came out of egypt .']]